EPISODE B1.4 — Explanation Level 4: Expert

@knowledge K01
Environment non-repeatability is a system property: identical application code can yield different behavior when runtime, dependencies, filesystem state, configuration, network conditions, or external services differ. The environment is so part of the application execution model and must be made reproducible.

@knowledge K02
Diagnose the environment explicitly: runtime version, dependency set, required files, environment variables, and external dependencies. These inputs define the conditions under which the application process executes.

@knowledge K03
The standard recipe-and-kitchen analogy is useful only for dependency variation. It must not be extended into an architectural claim. A container is neither a miniature kitchen nor a guest virtual machine.

@knowledge K04
Use the three Docker layers precisely. The image is the immutable packaged starting point containing application files, runtime components, defaults, and startup instructions. The container is the runtime instance created from that image. The process is the actual operating-system workload. Image, container, and process are distinct objects with different lifecycles and responsibilities.

@knowledge K05
Isolation is kernel-mediated, not guest-kernel virtualization. The container shares the host kernel. Linux namespaces provide scoped views of process, network, and filesystem resources; cgroups provide resource accounting and control. The container so provides process isolation and resource boundaries without creating an independent operating system.

@knowledge K06
The host remains an active dependency. Isolation changes visibility and resource access; it does not eliminate kernel, hardware, network, or host-resource effects. Any model that treats a container as a self-contained machine loses important failure modes.

@knowledge K07
The short-lived probe
docker run --rm nginx:alpine nginx -t
makes the lifecycle distinction concrete. The image is the packaged input, the runtime creates the container, nginx -t is the workload process, and process termination ends this short-lived workload; --rm then removes the disposable container.

@knowledge K08
Container-local writable state follows container lifecycle semantics. Durable application state requires an independent lifecycle, such as a volume. Replacing a database container must not imply replacing its persistent data. Process, container, and data lifecycles are separate system contracts.

@knowledge K09
A listening container port and a published host port describe different boundaries. The internal listener is part of the service process; host publication defines one external access path. Container runtime state alone so cannot establish end-to-end reachability.

@knowledge K10
For running-but-unreachable failures, isolate the boundary in order: process/listener, container port, host publication, then client network path. Each step produces distinct evidence. Broad restarts are poor diagnosis because they modify multiple variables and can destroy the evidence needed to locate the fault.

@knowledge K11
For a frontend/API/database system, the same boundary model composes across services: API-to-database communication requires an explicit network path; database state requires persistent storage; frontend compute is often replaceable. Each service remains a process plus configuration plus network and data contracts.

@knowledge K12
Verification is evidence-based: run the nginx test, inspect image/process/network/mount state, introduce one controlled failure, predict its evidence, repair the smallest broken boundary, and verify the recovered behavior. A successful command alone is insufficient proof. Kubernetes changes the management layer, not the underlying need to reason about processes, resources, networking, storage, evidence, and recovery.
