EPISODE B1.4 — Explanation Level 3: Professional

@knowledge K01
The core DevOps problem is environment non-repeatability. The same application artifact can produce different behavior across machines because runtime version, dependencies, files, configuration, networking, or external services differ. The environment is part of the executable system, not a detail outside it.

@knowledge K02
The first diagnostic inputs are concrete environment facts: runtime version, dependency set, expected files, environment variables, and external dependencies. Inspect these before changing application logic because they define the conditions under which the process actually runs.

@knowledge K03
The kitchen analogy captures the dependency problem: the same recipe can produce different results when the execution environment differs. It is only an analogy. A container is not a miniature kitchen and is not a virtual machine with another guest operating system.

@knowledge K04
Keep the Docker vocabulary precise. The image is the reproducible packaged starting point: application files, runtime pieces, defaults, and startup instructions. The container is a running instance created from the image. The process is the operating-system process doing the application work. Confusing image, container, and process makes diagnosis harder.

@knowledge K05
Container isolation is implemented with operating-system mechanisms. The container uses the host kernel rather than booting a separate guest kernel. Namespaces provide separate views of processes, networking, and filesystem-related resources. Cgroups provide resource accounting and limits. The result is process isolation plus resource control, not a second computer.

@knowledge K06
The host remains part of the execution model. A container changes process visibility and resource boundaries, but the process still depends on shared host infrastructure. Kernel behavior, hardware, networking, and resource pressure remain relevant. Isolation narrows the dependency surface; it does not remove the host from the system.

@knowledge K07
A short concrete example is:
docker run --rm nginx:alpine nginx -t
The image supplies the starting state. The runtime creates the container. The nginx configuration test is the process. Because the command is short-lived, the process exits and --rm removes the container. The example separates environment creation from the application work performed inside it.

@knowledge K08
Container writable state has container lifecycle semantics. If an important database file is stored only there, removing the container can remove that state. A persistent volume gives important data a separate lifecycle so the data can survive container replacement. Therefore process lifecycle, container lifecycle, and data lifecycle should not be treated as the same thing.

@knowledge K09
Networking has at least two relevant port boundaries. The service can listen on a container-side port, while the host publishes that service through a host-side port. Those values need not be identical. A running container proves that a runtime environment exists; it does not prove that an external client has a valid path to the service.

@knowledge K10
For a running-but-unreachable service, use a narrow evidence tree: verify the process and socket/listening state, verify the expected container port, verify host-port publication, and verify the client-to-host network path. Each check tests a different boundary. Avoid broad changes because a restart can change evidence without explaining the original failure.

@knowledge K11
A frontend, API, and database illustrate the same model at service level. The API requires an explicit network path to the database. The database requires persistent storage. The frontend can usually be treated as replaceable compute. Each service still has process, configuration, networking, and storage behavior, so the overall system is the composition of these explicit boundaries.

@knowledge K12
The hands-on proof should be evidence-driven. Run the nginx test. Inspect the running container or equivalent short-lived execution and identify image, process configuration, network configuration, and mounts. Introduce one controlled failure, predict the observable symptom, inspect evidence, repair the smallest broken boundary, and verify recovery. The evidence should support an explanation, not just a zero exit code. Kubernetes can schedule and manage containers later, but it still depends on the same process, resource, networking, storage, evidence, and recovery reasoning.
