EPISODE B1.4 — Explanation Level 1: Very simple

@knowledge K01
An application can work on one laptop and fail on another even when the application code is the same. The reason can be the environment around the application: the runtime, libraries, files, settings, network, or other things the application needs. The environment is part of the system, so we want a repeatable environment.

@knowledge K02
Before we blame the application, look at the runtime version, the libraries or other dependencies, the files the application expects, its environment variables, and the outside services it depends on. These checks tell us what the application is actually running with.

@knowledge K03
Here is a simple picture. Two cooks can have the same recipe but different kitchens. One kitchen has the right oven and tools and the other does not. The result can be different. This helps us understand the environment problem, but a container is not literally a little kitchen.

@knowledge K04
A container gives us three important words. An image is the packaged starting point. It can contain the application, its runtime pieces, files, defaults, and instructions for starting. A container is a running copy made from the image. A process is the application work that is actually running. Image, container, and process are different things.

@knowledge K05
A container is not a full virtual machine. It does not start another separate Linux kernel. It uses the host kernel. The operating system can use features called namespaces to give a process its own view of processes, networking, and other resources. It can use control groups, often called cgroups, to control and limit resource use.

@knowledge K06
This means the process can feel separated from other processes, but the host still matters. The container does not remove the host. The process still uses shared host infrastructure such as the kernel, hardware, and network path. Isolation hides some details; it does not make those details disappear.

@knowledge K07
Try a short command:
docker run --rm nginx:alpine nginx -t
The image provides the starting environment. The runtime creates a container. The nginx test process runs inside it. The --rm option asks Docker to remove the short-lived container after the process ends. A short command like this finishes when its process finishes.

@knowledge K08
A container can have writable filesystem state, but normal container writable state belongs to that container's lifetime. If the container is removed, we should not assume important data will still be there. Important data should use a persistent storage mechanism such as a volume. The important data then has a lifecycle separate from replacing the container.

@knowledge K09
Networking has another boundary. A process can listen on a port inside the container, such as port 80. The host can publish that container port on another host port. So saying "the application uses port 80" is incomplete unless we say where. Also, a container being reported as running does not prove that a client can reach the service.

@knowledge K10
When a running service cannot be reached, do not restart everything first. Check the process: is it alive and listening? Then check the container-side port. Then check the published host port. Then check the network path from the client to the host. These are different boundaries, so test them one at a time. A restart is not a diagnosis.

@knowledge K11
Imagine a small system with a frontend, an API, and a database. The API needs a network path to the database. The database needs persistent data. The frontend may be disposable. Each service still has a process, configuration, network behavior, and storage behavior. Containers make those boundaries more explicit, but the system still has to be designed correctly.

@knowledge K12
A useful lab proves the model. Run the nginx configuration test. Use docker ps and inspection commands to see the image, process settings, network settings, and storage mounts. Then make one controlled failure, predict what should break, observe the evidence, repair the smallest broken boundary, and verify recovery. The useful evidence includes the image, process, network, storage, failure signal, and recovery result. Kubernetes can manage containers later, but it does not remove the need to reason about processes, resources, networking, storage, evidence, and recovery.
