EPISODE B1.3 — Why the Application Needs HTTP, TLS and DNS

Speaker A: The frontend says, "The API is down."

Speaker B: We already know that sentence is a symptom, not a diagnosis.

Speaker A: Good. Let's follow one request instead.

Speaker B: Suppose the browser requests:

Speaker B: https://api.example.com/orders

Speaker A: What has to happen before the application can return an HTTP response?

Speaker B: The client needs address information.

Speaker A: DNS.

Speaker B: Then a network path.

Speaker A: Routing.

Speaker B: Then a reachable transport endpoint.

Speaker A: Right.

Speaker B: Then TLS for HTTPS.

Speaker A: Right.

Speaker B: Then HTTP carries the application request.

Speaker A: Exactly.

Speaker B: So the visual is DNS -> Route -> Transport -> TLS -> HTTP.

Speaker A: Yes. And the important part is not memorizing the five labels. It is knowing what each stage proves.

Speaker B: Prediction first?

Speaker A: Always.

Speaker B: DNS works. The connection works. TLS works. The API returns 401.

Speaker A: What should you inspect first?

Speaker B: Authentication.

Speaker A: Why not DNS?

Speaker B: Because the request already survived DNS, routing, transport and TLS.

Speaker A: Exactly. The error tells us how far the request got.

Speaker B: That is more useful than a table of error codes.

Speaker A: Much more.

Speaker B: Start at DNS.

Speaker A: DNS helps the client map a name to address information.

Speaker B: It is not responsible for the application response.

Speaker A: Correct.

Speaker B: And a DNS answer can be valid but not what we expected because of stale cache, different resolvers or configuration.

Speaker A: Yes. Always ask: "What answer did this client actually get?"

Speaker B: Then route.

Speaker A: The host decides how to reach that address.

Speaker B: Again, I care about the decision, not one specific command.

Speaker A: Good.

Speaker B: Then transport.

Speaker A: In a common HTTPS deployment, TCP is part of the path and the server listens on a TCP port.

Speaker B: We need a connection before the application can exchange a normal HTTP request over that connection.

Speaker A: Exactly.

Speaker B: Now TLS.

Speaker A: TLS gives the connection security properties. In normal HTTPS use, the client and server establish cryptographic parameters, the server proves its identity through a certificate, and keys are established for the protected session.

Speaker B: So TLS is more than "turn on encryption."

Speaker A: Yes.

Speaker B: A certificate can be present and still be wrong for the requested name.

Speaker A: Correct.

Speaker B: Or the client can fail to trust the certificate chain.

Speaker A: Correct.

Speaker B: Or the handshake can fail for other configuration or protocol reasons.

Speaker A: Exactly. "TLS failed" is still a category, not a complete root cause.

Speaker B: Then HTTP.

Speaker A: HTTP gives the application a request and response model.

Speaker B: Method, path, headers, body.

Speaker A: And a response with status, headers and possibly a body.

Speaker B: GET, POST, PUT, DELETE.

Speaker A: Common methods, yes.

Speaker B: So transport moves bytes, TLS protects the session, and HTTP gives those bytes application meaning.

Speaker A: That is a useful first model.

Speaker B: Let's break it.

Speaker A: The API returns 404.

Speaker B: That means we got an HTTP response.

Speaker A: Yes.

Speaker B: So we already know the request reached an HTTP-speaking component.

Speaker A: Usually the application or something in front of it that understands HTTP.

Speaker B: And the exact root cause of 404 depends on the system.

Speaker A: Good. It could be a missing route, a missing resource, or a proxy rule, depending on the architecture.

Speaker B: So the status narrows the search. It does not finish it.

Speaker A: Exactly.

Speaker B: Next failure: connection refused.

Speaker A: Where do we look?

Speaker B: Transport and the endpoint that refused the connection.

Speaker A: Good.

Speaker B: Next: timeout.

Speaker A: Your move.

Speaker B: Do not jump to one cause. Check route, filtering, service reachability and health, and test from the place that actually fails.

Speaker A: Good.

Speaker B: Next: certificate name mismatch.

Speaker A: Where?

Speaker B: TLS certificate identity and the name the client requested.

Speaker A: Good.

Speaker B: Next: HTTP 403.

Speaker A: Where?

Speaker B: Authorization.

Speaker A: Usually, yes.

Speaker B: Next: HTTP 500.

Speaker A: Where?

Speaker B: The application or an upstream dependency, depending on the architecture. The status tells me the HTTP layer completed, but I still need logs or tracing to find the root cause.

Speaker A: Exactly.

Speaker B: This is what I like about the layered model.

Speaker A: It gives every failure a place to start.

Speaker B: Not every failure a complete answer.

Speaker A: Correct.

Speaker B: Now the everyday analogy.

Speaker A: Imagine calling a clinic.

Speaker B: The number is wrong.

Speaker A: Naming problem.

Speaker B: You have the right number but cannot reach the phone.

Speaker A: Connection problem.

Speaker B: The line connects, but the secure phone system rejects identity.

Speaker A: Security or identity problem.

Speaker B: Someone answers and says, "You cannot book this service."

Speaker A: Authorization.

Speaker B: The receptionist answers and says the booking system crashed.

Speaker A: Application failure.

Speaker B: The analogy helps, but the real system is still DNS, routes, transport, TLS and HTTP.

Speaker A: Exactly. Never let the analogy replace the mechanism.

Speaker B: Let's watch a real request.

Speaker A: Run:

Speaker A: curl -v https://example.com

Speaker B: First I watch the name lookup.

Speaker A: Yes.

Speaker B: Then the connection.

Speaker A: Yes.

Speaker B: Then TLS.

Speaker A: Yes.

Speaker B: Then HTTP.

Speaker A: Right.

Speaker B: And I do not try to understand every line.

Speaker A: Correct. Pick one stage and identify the evidence.

Speaker B: Now let's create three safe failures.

Speaker A: First: connect to a local port where nothing is listening.

Speaker B: That trains refusal.

Speaker A: Second: make a request through a path that can safely time out, using a controlled local test.

Speaker B: That trains timeout as a different signal.

Speaker A: Third: request a known missing HTTP path.

Speaker B: That gives an application-layer response instead of a connection failure.

Speaker A: Exactly.

Speaker B: What about TLS?

Speaker A: Use a controlled test environment for certificate failures. Do not turn a production certificate change into a beginner lab.

Speaker B: Good.

Speaker A: The lesson should teach the mechanism without creating an unsafe incident.

Speaker B: That matters.

Speaker A: A failure exercise must be bounded, reversible and observable.

Speaker B: Let's make it realistic.

Speaker A: The API works from the engineer's laptop but the frontend container gets 401.

Speaker B: Then I first prove the container can resolve the API name.

Speaker A: Yes.

Speaker B: Then it can connect.

Speaker A: Yes.

Speaker B: Then TLS succeeds.

Speaker A: Yes.

Speaker B: If HTTP returns 401, the basic network path is not my first problem anymore.

Speaker A: Exactly.

Speaker B: I inspect the authentication context from inside the container.

Speaker A: Good.

Speaker B: Same API, different client environment.

Speaker A: Which is why location matters.

Speaker B: The laptop and container do not automatically have identical network state or credentials.

Speaker A: Correct.

Speaker B: Another realistic case: the DNS record was changed, some users see the new service and others still reach the old one.

Speaker A: What do you ask?

Speaker B: Which users are affected? What answers are their resolvers returning? What TTL or cache behavior is involved?

Speaker A: Good.

Speaker B: So "DNS is broken" is not enough.

Speaker A: Right. We want the actual evidence from the affected client.

Speaker B: One more prediction.

Speaker A: Go.

Speaker B: TLS succeeds, and HTTP returns 401.

Speaker A: What did the request survive?

Speaker B: DNS, routing, transport and TLS.

Speaker A: What should the next investigation focus on?

Speaker B: Authentication at the application boundary.

Speaker A: Exactly.

Speaker B: The path itself is a debugging tool.

Speaker A: That is the lesson.

Speaker B: Now connect it to B1.

Speaker A: Frontend -> API.

Speaker B: API -> database.

Speaker A: The frontend's request can fail before it reaches the API.

Speaker B: The API can return an HTTP error after the network path works.

Speaker A: The API can then fail on its own dependency.

Speaker B: So one visible page error can represent very different system states.

Speaker A: Correct.

Speaker B: And the same evidence rule still works.

Speaker A: What happened? How far did the request get? What evidence separates the remaining causes?

Speaker B: Good.

Speaker A: Lab time.

Speaker A: Run:

Speaker A: curl -v https://example.com

Speaker B: Record one line of evidence for DNS, one for connection, one for TLS, and one for HTTP.

Speaker A: Then test a known closed local port and compare the connection error.

Speaker B: Then request a known missing HTTP path and compare the result.

Speaker A: Finally, write one sentence for each failure: "This proves..." and "This does not prove..."

Speaker B: That is a good evidence habit.

Speaker A: It is.

Speaker B: Recall.

Speaker A: What does DNS do?

Speaker B: It gives address information for a name.

Speaker A: What does TLS add?

Speaker B: A protected session with encryption and identity checks.

Speaker A: What does HTTP add?

Speaker B: The application request and response model.

Speaker A: What does a 401 tell you?

Speaker B: An HTTP-speaking component responded with an authentication-related result; I still need more evidence for the root cause.

Speaker A: Why is a timeout not the same as refusal?

Speaker B: A timeout means the expected response did not arrive in time. A refusal means a connection attempt was actively rejected.

Speaker A: Final challenge.

Speaker B: The frontend works on the laptop but gets 401 from inside the container.

Speaker A: Your diagnostic order?

Speaker B: Resolve the API name from the container. Confirm the connection. Confirm TLS. Then inspect authentication and credentials.

Speaker A: And if DNS fails?

Speaker B: Stop at DNS. Do not spend time debugging HTTP yet.

Speaker A: Good.

Speaker B: So the goal is not to memorize HTTP codes.

Speaker A: It is to know how far the request got, what that evidence proves, and what it leaves unresolved.

Speaker B: Run the lab and bring back the evidence.
